Toivi, you wanted to talk about the Shtetl about the place where you lived as a small
boy. Thank you for allowing me your time. It is December, eh, 15, 2009. This is Thomas
Blatt, alias Toivi Blatt, which is his Polish name. Please talk about your Shtetl
I'm born in a small Jewish town, Izbica in Eastern Poland. The, the town had about 3,600 people, that's
all 96% Jewish. It started in the 16th century und eh, it was very poor. Very religious, orthodox. There
was a famous rabbi in Izbica Landau eh . My father was well off in Izbica because he had a liquor store.
Eh be, he was in the Polish eh, volunteered to the Polish legionnaires, Piłsudski's legionnaires
and he was wounded. Eh, because of it, he had this eh business, the liquor store. So we had a way to,
to, to make a living. Most of the Jewish had little shops , they were peddlers For me, Izbica was the
eh centre of the world. I didn't want to go any place else, I loved this town. Izbica was used by
the Germans later as a trap, because on three sides Izbica was surrounded by hill sides. And the fourth
side was a river. So it was enough for Germans to put a few soldiers on the hill sides and no.., nobody
could escape from the town. Because from the top of the town you could look down and see everything,
from the top of the hill. Izbica was later used as a transit ghetto and we'll speak later about this.
Eh what could I say? I had eh a brother, Hersz Ber we used to live in a house which years, years ago
was a beautiful house caughs, two floors and now, and I remember 1938 and '39 to the fall, it already
was devastated, no repairs, the dach, the, the roof used to leak and eh but I still was happy to be
there. When it was raining we had some trouble, because the water from the hill side that used go down
to the , to the town and we had a water up to the knees practically some time. My father was not particularly
religious and they called him Leibele Goy. Goy was a synonym of a person who doesn't believe, who
is tough and so on. Eh at one time my dad, I remember him many times he closed the windows, the shutters,
locked the door, he smoked cigarettes on shabbes, eat eh non-kosher meat, I've seen everything eh
and I realize eh, eh he shouldn't do it, but he has done it and later he he, he get me to try, and
Rasko too and I did try, it was very good. And I didn't understand why it is forbidden for Jewish
to eat it. So it was an old house and the later generations after generations, you know, it was divided
in the, for, for the, for the family for in, in eh, on the end side I remember in 1938/'39, eh, eh,
it were few very small eh rooms for each eh member of the extended family. We did live in a two room
apartment we had to say, eh, it was a kitchen, a small kitchen, there was there over there a bed for
the maid, hm, and eh eh later another room had a table, some chairs and still later was this bedroom,
had two beds, very close to each other. And eh not far was the cemetery with a lot of trees and each
morning did the, eh, I, all remember, looking through the window, a flock of birds did go over from,
from the trees, eh, on the cemetery and they flow over our house, I still remember this.-
Is it easier for you to talk German? Or is English all right?
Eh
Es kann auch in Deutsch. Ist das leichter?
English is okay?
Eh, I said, I said, very religious, eh, my, my dad didn't go to, to the Sjiel every day, but eh Yom
Kippur he did go. He had his own place I remember on the western side I think of the Sjiel eh
Did you go with him?
Once in a while, it was only once in a year Yom Kippur.
Of course
[grins]
[laughs]
So what else do I remember? We didn't have toilets. If you want to
Of course
if you want to go, you did run to, out house and, eh, half a mile away, many times I didn't make
it in time. And eh I remember the, eh, we called Wasserträger, the guy who delivered water.
Water
He was always a person mentally ill, eh, he did deliver water in buckets, we had in the home a big container
von metal sheet, eh, twice a day he did bring us the water. No, it wasn't like now. To make a meal
was a big job, it wasn't like now you go to the wall, you turn a switch and you have eh water cooking
Yes of course
and when you really need to go to the eh special closet and pick up wood and start
a fire in the kitchen, eh was a whole ceremony and finally there were some meal,
good meal if my mother made it. I remember the commandant of the police, Bürgermeister,
used to come to us, eh Fridays to try my mother's fish, carp.
Oh it's lovely, carp, isn't it?
Pardon?
Wonderful
Yes
An old traditional Jewish carp is
Yeah, and eh, they put the rifles in the co, in the corner of the room and I immediately
fast closed the rifle, checking, my mother was shaking because, don't touch that
[grins] because it could shoot immediately. Later when they eat, they say thank you,
they kissed my mothers hand, they wanted to be elegant. And they left.
So they behaved well towards Jews?
Pardon?
They behaved well
Yes, but
towards Jews?
the same policeman later were beasts they took us to the train stations on. This I remember, I
remember her see them dancing on the street. I remember when the Jews, a Jewish Jud from Zamość,
a neighboring city, that eh arrived Saturday on bicycles without a hat, eh, oh God! The Zamosce
goy might hear, the, the, the, chassid orthodox Jews, they chased them with stones..
Really? ..yes, chased them out from the city immediately. Saturday, with a bike, without
a hat! I went out, I had, eh took down my hat, immediately I put on my yarmulke,
you should leave a second without yarmulke I did I wear, I did wear payes.
You?
Yeah, can believe me, looking at me, I mean, me with payes Hm. But, eh, eh, say so, there
said so many people, Oi, Toivi, I can't believe it! If your grandpa would get up von,
eh von, von his grave and look at you, the way you are now, he would go voluntary back
to the grave. Because I didn't have payes, I didn't have tzitzis some kind
Yes, but it's a different time, and look what has happened
Yeah
[laughs]
So eh, I, I was no Jew actually according to the standards that time, how you should behave. I should
say, eh eh, eh, eh, a blessing for bread and for water and eh, I, I did know a few words and I hated
the Jewish school. I lo, I loved the Polish school. On Sunday was no mathematics.
You like mathematics?
No! I hated it.
Okay
But I left eh, I left eh, I liked the public school, and I did, in, in literature I was very good. And
eh eh, eh I liked, I remember, liked religion. When other kids were saying oh, religion is not important,
we go to the, to the river, I was sitting and listening, it was a beautiful stories about Salomon, about
eh David so I didn't understand why the guys didn't want to listen the stories.
The Bible is narrative, it is beautiful
Yes
Yeah Beautiful
[eats]
So on
I didn't'want to, I didn't want to go to the Jewish school, the so-called Cheider
Yeah?
Because there was a long table, there was about eight boys sitting and each one had a seder, a book
and you read a paragraph later the rabbi, the rabbie, not rabbi, the rabbie said: next one. The next
one would start to read a paragraph and went on this, I didn't understand it. Everything was in Hebrew,
so eh, after a while the you yawn and the rabbi had, the rabbie, had a when you eh would yawn he put
in his eh his stick which he did eh point at in the book, he put in the, in the mouth.
Ja.
The guy who, yawned, oh God. This is what I remember and I didn't learn anything in the
jiddish school and when I went sometime to the Sjiel, pretending I know something, I took
this b, this book, the sacred Thora, how you call it, and was shaking, I , the other people
were shaking, and when it's time, when everybody said Amen, I repeated Amen
[laughs]
and it was good. You know, but they didn't have an idea that I don't, except
this paragraph, I don't know, nothing more. [coughs] And later, what do they have
else? I didn't have Bar Mitzwa, no. And probably I wouldn't have because I hated
the school, the Cheider. You have Bar Mitswa when you were thirteen
You prepare for half a year or a year, so we had other problems than Bar Mitswa. So I didn't. Ja, I,
I did read a lot. As a matter of fact, I did go to the position, but this was already in the war
and I, before the war, I did read a rot, a lot because, m, my father was considered eh Piłsudski's
k, legionair, volunteer eh, in Poland, in, in the fight for Poland. So my mother eh had privileges.
And she could take books, loan books from the, eh, Polish Library.
Hmhm
So she took books from over there, and I steal it in the evening and did read it. There was some
serious book eh, what I understood quite a lot. Eh, one book did eh effect me in a way, eh, I remember
until now. It was the title too I remember, Gdy budzi sie bestia When the beast is awake. Awakened.
It is a story of people that were thrown, eh, the tr, the ship sink and they were thrown on a, on
an is, island and there were two women and eight men and they, oh, the whole story, eh, v, eh showing
from the nice people before and they, when, when the ship was eh complete and how later they became
beasts, fighting, with feelings of, for the woman and, and this did eh, never did, and every time
later in the war, this book eh, eh, I, I, I have seen eh, eh, the way the book was eh, eh that the
eh book portrayed the people eh exact the way you do, eh they are.
That eh people could change. As a matter of fact, they ask me now what do you did learn from
the Holocaust and I can't really speci, eh, pin point, but one thing I know I learned that
nobody knows them selves in, in normal eh conditions they could be nice and polite, eh if something
changes, you could be a, a, a beast. Depends everything, on the conditions you live in. In
the situation, the political situation, eh, economical situation. Anyway,
You learned a lot
Pardon?
You learned a lot from those books
Yeah, I, I remember till now, you can see, and also I stopped believing in God slowly.
I mean, I ha, eh, eh, I still didn't believe what I learned that God could do
everything, she, so, eh, eh, it was dark in Izbica, eh, the, as far as I remem,
eh, remember we didn't have electrical light, we had kerosene light
Yes, Of course
because winter time is five o'clock you go to bed [grins] so, but eh, eh, I remember when the eh,
eh rabbi died. And eh his wife, children were crying, you know, it wasn't like now, a funeral, everything
is quiet, you know, in that time you did scream on the street and your hand, a finger, so
Tear your clothes?
Yes, and I was thinking why did the rabbi die? It's a rabbi, he should live, long, long,
long, he's Gods person! he was and later, than later the synagogue was on fire. And I
said something is wrong. A synagogue is a, eh is Gods eh home, can he prevent it from burning?
Anything else could burn, but not a synagogue! And so a little, flashes of disbelieve.
Eventually I said goodbye to God in Sobibor. There is a survivor from Sobibor. I, I go
out a little bit. There is a survivor from Sobibor, Esther Raab.
Yes
Esther , and I heard her saying, Esther, had, what, eh why did you survive, I mean, what, what
eh, had, tell me about your survival, she said God. God, because of God. Once it made me really
mad and I told her, Esther okay, you did come to Sobibor with two sisters and your parents. They
were taken away, you was left. You can't take it at one side, I survive because of God. If this
is the case, your parents and your sister died because of God too. And I don't want the hear
anymore about God. So, I stopped believing at all, if you ask me now, I believe that something
exists which is running our world, but not in the sense of eh God, if you beg him, you pray to
him and he will help you. Eh, if I would be a believer, I believe in a terrible God. Eh, anyway,
going back to Izbica. Eh in Izbica eh it was not so , or eh I'm going eh to Toivi Blatt, eh a
friend of mine, I did never say I'm going to Toivi Blatt, I'm going to, to, to, to Toivi Leibele
Goyish. Eh every man, every person had a, how you call it, eh synonym
Yes, a pseudonym
and, and this, told the whole story eh very, there was a guy,
we called him Jo, eh, I'm going to Dziobaty lojne
What is Jojne, a city? Join is an English word. Yes
Your name
but what does it mean?
J, eh, no, no, it's a Jiddish word, I don't know, but Dziobaty is in Polish,
Dziobaty is chicken pock Jojne, and you needed not have chicken pocks or you
go to, another, our neighbor, eh, Liza Schetszke. Liza is a name
Of course
an Jiddish name
Schetszke is straw, you know you make it for the, for the food for the horses, eh, you
got, is, it's straw from the, from common straw when, which you cut a little, eh
Yes
eh this is called Schetszke, this was food for her horses, he dealed with horses, so I did
know Liza Schetszke, Schetszke horse, he's a, he had something to do with the horses.
Eh, now there was Lu, Lume Janku, Janku is a name, but Lume means, eh, their leg
Leg, leg
is bad, lame, lame, Lame Janku and everybody has it and eh we d, they,
the story of his, at least part of his story who he is and. Were there many people, two hundred or three hundred people,
How many people were there? I have a list actually of Jews from 193. In that time there were 3000 or so much.
That is a lot
Many of our jews were there, many, many. Exceot that the, the Bu, the
Bürgermeister, the major of the city, commandant of the police, the policeman,
the postmaster, were Christians. The rest only Jews. Yes?
So you talked about everybody knowing each other very close
Close after I was liberated and I go to Izbica for my hiding coming to Izbica with another
two Jews and we stay in the middle of the market place, I look around in a place where
everybody didn't know each other, where no door was open for me, ai, Toivi look here,
come in, come in, come in, they would say always, friendly I didn't have where to go.
I can't go to my home because some, eh, eh, eh other people living over there and eh,
so I did run away from over there, from the same day, it was terrible.
It struck me that your book really stops at this moment
Yes, yes, when I did run away. That was a bit later, yes. So.
So you went back to Izbit, Iz, Izbica
I go every year back to Izbica. This year eh, yes I was there this year in Izbica too. It's a
strange place, I, I meet, eh, boys, Christian boys which chased me want to deliver me to the Nazis
and eh, in Germ, eh, and I talked eh, they read my late, latest interview in Polytika
Yes?
Ja. Too bad, because I have it here in the home. Anyway eh I meet guys which did eh, give, give,
give, eh deliver Jews to the Germans. You can't do anything. And in my latest interview, I,
I said to this interviewer from Polytika, eh, lately that eh in Germany, in Frankfurt and Berlin
I have seen many houses with little eh brass eh labels, as if here eh was eh, was living a Jew
and this and this and this name, a memorial in some way. I remember in some way. Than I say,
no, no this is a co, eh completely different story, you don't mention they were Jewish. Many
Jew, many Christians in, in Izbica they don't even know that we in the history of of, of eh,
easily said that their houses were actually 100% Jewish houses, yeah.
It's a kind of silence
Yes, the, eh, the, eh, I was wondering, I eh, when I spoke to German people, German public, I can speak,
I spoke a few weeks ago, about 800, eh people, eh, have, a feeling that they are listening what I'm
talking about, the feeling, a feeling, I'm reaching somebody and in Poland eh I have a different
feeling. They still, they still don't go out open, they still going, come in, how could they help
Jews and so through this? That if a Pole helps the Jew he's really a hero. Because they the common
conditions in Poland were different than the conditions in another country. But eh eh, but how many
were of them. And they were afraid of the neighbors a young man eh, me, a Pole delivered to the, into
the eh Sobibor, brother too, my father didn't want to go out, von, where, where will he go, go, go
out from the ghetto and he will be immediately delivered and beaten and so on. So this was our situation.
And the, the German didn't recognize the, eh, who's a Jew, who is not a Jew. They were taught,
eh, to, eh, they were, eh, they teach them about Jews in Germany and the, the typical Jewish that we
have big eyes and a long nose and this and this and this, so they wouldn't be able to recognize the,
they looked for Jews with long beard without, I don't know, the Poles, so then the Polish youth sought
them, saw who was a Jew, who was not.
Tovi, I have two themes I want to come back to. I want to come back
to the Polish attitude, because it is so important for you.. Polish?
..The attitude towards the Jew. But let us now go back to your old
place. You never expected The poles to become so hostile?
I thought my, eh, eh, I was naïve, naïve was I. When I have seen a Pole beating another Pole and
this was the first year of the German occupation, [swallows] I thought 'what's happened here?'
He's a Polish policeman beating another Pole for something, I don't know for what, when we have
a common enemy! Why does he bea, beat his brother? And later I was thinking what's happened here
in Izbica? swallows The Germans invaded Poland Now a German was a Polish enemy and we should get
together, the Poles, now we have a common enemy, should get together Poles and Jews and not hurt
each other at least. I was never to understand it why the Poles, and some of the police eh helping
the Germans. But later eh, I was aware what the partisans would do eh, it was difficult to understand
why eh, eh, we are, we are not together facing this enemy.
Did you expect this to be when the Germans invaded Poland?
No, that what I say, I expected that now we have a common enemy.
Yes, exactly, yes
I think, we were closer than ever. Yes
But why eh is happened that it was further, further away.
Yes, sure
No, because, you see
Yes, I understand
The Poland didn't want eh, eh, the, eh, the Jews. The Jew was a competitor in business and
eh, many aspects. So in, in, eh, they were happy. I want to say it plain. They were happy that
their dream, Poland without Jews, is finally coming true. So eh they are saying till now, many
Poles, that one good thing which Hitler has done is cleaned up Poland from Jews.
I know, I know. But when the, the Germans invaded, when
were you for the first time confronted with this?
When I, eh, when the war started my parents were, were, eh, seeking shelter in the forest.
Yes
When they did come back the Germans moved out from, from Izbica.
Hm
They did come to Izbica when the fighting was on, later there was agreement
between the Sovjet Union and the Germans, about the division of Poland.
Molotov-Ribbentroppact
So Izbica did go back to the Germans. When I arrived with my parents from the forest, eh, eh, I
was also, take a look the war is end, at the end, Poland surrendered and I didn't see one German
soldier. And my brother said 'oh, next to the bakery there are still two soldiers'. So I run
to the bakery, there they are, loading bread on the bike, they had regular bikes, and eh he did
throw me a siga, eh, candy and I said to, Danke schön, eh, scheinen dank, in Jiddish
Hmhm
So you correcting is not a scheinen dank, is danke schön. They looked nice, eh, and they left,
so this was my first encounter. When the first Germans, I heard, arrived in Izbica they shot,
they killed about six Jews. But everybo, everybody said 'oh is because the war conditions,
they did just come in and shooting, fighting with the J, with the Polish soldiers'. So I
remember many Jews said oh, if they would shoot at least two hundred Jews, three hundred Jews,
that would be a blessing. Because all Jews would run away together with the Russians. And so
we said oh because of war conditions. And later it was too late.
But you, when did you for the first feel this hostility from the Poles?
From the Poles?
Yes
Eh when the Germans did come back to Poland, eh to Izbica, the Russians left, the Germans come back.
But for about a week there was, how would I say, eh, a, a lawless city. And that time eh two Polish
men, Krudakosky Manjek and another one I can't remember, eh, written, in my book, threw a grenade
to a group of Jews talking on the street. Killed a woman so on that point the Jews eh, the Poles
came across because the Polish people and the Jews because the Jews cooperated with the, eh communists.
It's in a, in a way true. What is true? True is number one that Izbica was poor, poorer than the
poorest. I remember Friday, this little town, smelt of kerosene. Why? Because Saturday, Saturday
started Friday. Shabbat. And the poor Jews were eh, this was, they went and washed herself in, eh
it was louse, from the dirt, it was louses and they
Louses
washed herself, with the hair, with kerosene to get it
With kerosene caps, yes
Yes, so they smell, eh, eh, when the, there were very poor, the Jews, who belonged to the
Communist Party did she, the poor people. My father didn't, didn't eh, belong, but other
Jews, so we didn't, they didn't see, the Poles which were in the, in the Communist eh
organization with the Jews, but they see the Jews. But it was a Jewish town, was mostly Jews.
But were Poles too. And eh this was the eh revenge for the Jewish cooperation within, eh with
the Communists. And from that time on la, eh, so, eh, as it did go to that point, that a group
of Jews with eh, eh, the leader was m, m, eh, Miriam eh Reutenstein
Hmhm
my relative, went to Krasnystaw to the nearby city inviting the G, the, the German
they should come in because it started to be impossible to be, to be lawless
the town. And so, eh, pretty soon the German military eh kommendatur
Kommandantur was established and everything was quiet down. But eh, in the end the Polish police eh,
the Germans established Polish police, which collaborated with them and later the Bürgermeister was
eh eh German, Volksdeutsch and eh, so it was going on we have seen it. A lot of Poles would like to
help Jews but were afraid of the neighbors. And a lot of Poles were sorry for Jews, can't do much.
The point is, is there were Poles which did help of course, but eh, they were afraid of the neighbors,
because so, all the one voted the Germans that he or their par, the, the, eh, the people eh hiding Jews
and the whole village was burned down. So that was a difficult situation. Ja.
You were delivered by Polish policemen
No, by Polish friend.
Okay. Can you tell the story please?
Eh
This I would like
Eh, must go fast from the beginning, just fast. Till I come to the story I will tell you the story.
Sure
Okay. The Germans arrived in 1939 . Izbica was established as a ghetto two Gestapo men arrived in Izbica
and s, eh, eh, established a Ausser office eh outside office of Gestapo. They were terrible people. Every
day they killed Jews on the street when they went on the stree, eh, out eh to the street. The street
was empty. And if somebody by chance, and Jews went through, then they shot him. Terrible, later of course,
eh, the, re, resetteled Jews from the, eh, eh, Posznan eh district to Izbica and later Czech Jews arrived
and later German Jews arrived, and eh, there were a few a short time, eh, time in Izbica and then were
taken to the eh death camps, they were killed. Eh my parents were in Izbica till late. Finally, in April
28 actually a little bit earlier, earlier, my mother send me to Hungary. She one day she told me Toivi
tonight you are leaving for Hungary. And I said ma, what, what do you mean, Hungary? I did know a little
bit about Hungary. In that time, in 1942, the Hungarian people did live a relatively peaceful way. The
killing of the Hungarian Jews started in 1944 when they sent them to Auschwitz. But 1942 was peaceful.
So the dream of many Jews in Izbica was, how could I close the border to Hungary. At that point some
Polish Christians, a group, under the leadership of Mishta Gayosh, they eh, told some Jewish people,
for money we could you smuggle, we could smuggle you to Hungary. What they have done, they smuggled them.
So I told my ma I know that the people which are smuggling Jews to Hungary for money, but did you hear
the rumors, my mother asked me yes, I heard. Did you hear that the people were, are taken to a forest
close to the Hungarian border and at a point they are telling the Jews, they already crossed the border
to Hungary? Please sign the letter that you did cross the border so your parents, or your relatives will
pay. And when you doing it, they killed. And everything is taken away from them. So my mother told me,
yes Toivi, we know. But here we are waiting to be killed. Hungary, maybe it's not true, maybe, maybe
eh is only a rumor. Up to you. So I said okay, let me think a minute, I'm going. It was two o'clock,
I did go out to our group which are waiting, the leader, Gayosh, had already, he bought tickets for us,
they gave us tickets and, into the darkness of the night, we managed to get out from Izibica to the train
station. The train arrived, we were eight people, we jumped in the last wagon and we were on the way
to Hungary. But we didn't make it. I was recognized. We, b, eh, it was a Jew, eh, a beautiful girl,
but she has eh, eh, typical, I would say Semitic features. By the Semitic I mean, she had dark hair,
curly hear, a little the nose was a little bit shoot, shoot a little bit too big maybe, eh anyway if
somebody was looking for Jewish persons, he could recognize that she is Jewish.-
But you
Pardon?
But you were very light
Yeah, yeah, this is the, when I talk about tra, eh, this, this girl so, she was a girl and from Izbica
she was standing close to the window, pretending that she's observing the scenery, but actually
she hide her face. Then the conductor come and ask her for the tickets, she turned her face. And
it's look like some fellow traveler did recognize her, because pretty soon, two, two Ukrainian
policemen arrived and took her away. At this point I made a mistake. And instead to be exited like
all the other eh, oh, they got a Jew and so on, I didn't know what to do, I was, I was fifteen
years old I was so scared and I had a paper and I pretended to have been reading when everybody else
was excited and talking, he's a felon, not in just reading. And so probable it was too dark like
a sort eh, when my face, when my paper was ripped from my face, the cop is Ukrainian, papers? Now
I did give my birth certificate eh forged birth certificate from the majors office, I was eh, that
time was my name Ptaszek You are Jewish! No I'm not Jewish. You are Jewish! I'm not. You are
Jewish! No. My face, eh, but my mouth said no, but my face said yes. [grins] But in, he still wasn't
eh sure because I had lighter hair and, and my nose was a little bit ku, shorter and eh so and Poland
was away to eh find out if I , this man is Jewish.
Hm
They simple check if you are circumcised. So he wasn't sure, he
took me to the toilet, look down looked up to me and looked down
he was surprised and now eh, I see he is confu, he's confused a little bit and now he's, he's,
calls, Iwan, Godishuda. It was another gendarme which was further in the wagon and Iwan come see,
Iwan looks down, Iwan you, look up, Iwan looks some confused. Why? What's happened? I had tried
to correct the damage they already do to me, the circumcision. They are done with a string and
with a look different but no miracles, it didn't help. The only, result was that everything was
shown, eh, because of it they recog, their logical was they think I must be Jewish if I manipulated
the, and they arrested me. Now to tell you the story till I, did come back to S, to Izbica, which
takes you a whole day and night. So I will skip a half a year. I will just tell you, they arrested
me. I was a half a year in jail in the city of Stryj
That's described in your book, yes
Yeah and later I did eh, I was in hospital and the last miracles with the g, I was listed
as killed, because they killed another person instead me, and I eh, the twenty, eh, or the
eighteen of April 1943 I was back in Izbica. And eh find out that my parents, that Izbica
was considered Judenrein, v, earlier, and took, and they took all the Jews to Sobibor. And
then later there was established general Judenstadt, Jews eh, did eh, s, allowed to come
back. And this was a lure because a, a lot of Jews were hiding in the forest.
Hm
So the
And your parents were still in Izbica?
Eh, eh, my father was hidden, in hidden, was arrested, was at Gestapo. My mother was a, was
a Polish eh woman, in Warsaw. I was in jail. And my little brother was some place hidden in
the, in, in eh Izbica. Anyway, but now was a new eh, eh order, the Gestapo p, eh let my dad
out, put in a, a, a, von, eh, dabei eh crown, in a Schein that Izbica is eh getting a Jude,
eh, Judenstadt. The, if Jews should come back and put it so that some Jews being in the forest
freezing because this was, eh, January, February, eh did come back to Izbica.
Hmhm
The Germans simple lured them back. And my dad and my ma did come back eh and so I arrived eh
later, the situation was eh, that about 200 Jews were in a tannery. There was a tannery
Hmhm
and they let the tannery work as work because leather was a strategic product, eh until they will
finish the job for the Gestapo and so on, so this was a group of illegally in Izbica. When I arrived.
April 28 arrival shut me up and I understood that this is the end of Izbica, of our life. I was apprehended,
taken outside, pushed into a group of the Jews which were already apprehended, were gathered by soldiers.
Then I can manage to slip out from the group of the soldiers. My guard, the soldier who, who, who,
the, who, he, he, he was standing next to me, but he want to smoke a cigarette, smoked, the wind
had blown to, so he turned away his head, far away from wind, picked up his collar from his coat
and smoked that cigarette. At that point I slipped out and mingled with the people, Polish people
who had come and eh see my friend, Jannick Knapschick, a Polish friend, and ask him Jannick help
and he said go to the barn, run to the barn, I go to the barn and eh, the barn has a lock on the
gate and I was not far of home and on the hillside start to yell, Toivi run! Run! What's happened?
Jannick is coming. So, if Jannick is coming, why should I run? He will open the g, the eh, the padlock.
But Jannick is coming with a German man, he's a Jew, so the German took me to the market place
and have seen out there that my parents, my brother sitting over there, so were two truck, two trucks
arrived, covered with canvas. They told us to go in and eh, the trucks start to move in a northern
direction where Sobibor was.
So you were betrayed by a Pole?
Pardon?
You were betrayed by your Polish friend?
I was betrayed, yes. My brother too for sure. And eh in the front of the two trucks was a jeep with
a machine gun, soldiers in the back too, a jeep, machine gun, and we start to move in the direction
of Sobibor. But still hoped everything could be taken away from somebody, hope will be there for the
last minute. So this hope, because on the way from Izbica to Sobibor, where two off ramps to death
camps, to concentration camps. And everything is better than a death camp. Actually if a for a Jew
it was a blessing, he, he was looking and he, if he made to a concentration camp. If you was healthy
and young you still had a chance to survive. In a death camp no selections, nothing.
Exactly.
So but we were passing the off ramp to one concentration camp and the truck didn't turn and the second
co, concentration camp, Travniki, until the next stop we know will be Sobibor and there is a talk, lead
through ourselves of the, inside the trucks are the Germans, we will die anyway and a talk, these were
young people and all the people will remember like my father said, no, we'll die anyway, let die eh
as a family. And so we come to Sobibor. We are ordered to go down and down, I was seeing not far away
a big fence, a long fence, green fence, it was green because it was interwoven with pine branches, and
a gate with the name SS Sonderkommando So, told us to go in, open the gate, get in, went in, the gate
is closed behind us. I look around, eh, and again, eh, eh, eh, a flicker of hope how could this be a
death camp? It's a neat, nice, in the left side [swallows] was a little house eh Trojan style, with
a, with a wooden sign, Schwalbenest, is which means Swallows nest, and eh, next to it was eh, got assignment,
a name eh for this eh little house, this was the commandant's villa the Schwalbenest. Opposite in another
side of the road was a, eh, platform, assembling eh, eh, and it looked like a train station, like a small
train station. It was a sign to Warsaw, to Lublin, eh, pretending to be a train station, but it was not
for the Polish Jews because the Polish Jews eh were aware eh, that this is eh, death camp, just was for
Jews from Holland, from Germany, from Czechoslovakia. They didn't know that eh this is a killing place.
So arrived and pretty soon the German eh Frenzel, which who, who I met after the war and spoke with him,
had a interview with him. And he start to yell women and children one side, men down other side. And
he separated. I was with my mother at that time, I said, eh, said goodbye to my mother and I, eh, feeling
that I had a better chance as a man, I went to the men. And later when the division was completed, the
women and children were ordered to go further on. It was about 200 meters. Eh and eh, was a small closing
behind the barbwires over there, also eh gr, green, interwoven with pine branches, where you can't
see the, what's going behind. And the man was, eh were still standing and he start to ask eh about
eh to the crowd about that they need some people in that time because a lot of us committed suicide.
He start to ask who is a carpenter, who is a mechanic, is a, eh eh whatever that they need. Me, fifteen
years old, fifteen and a half, eh, eh, eh, a boy my age goes to school, so I didn't eh, but I pushed
myself to the front, to this German, tell him eh, begging God he should, take me, he should eh take me
out, the German and finally he did take me out. Said komm eraus du Kleiner. And he included me in the
forty people he selected to work in Sobibor. And this way I worked in Sobibor. My first job was to eh,
eh, first was I, I replaced the, dried out, eh branches, pine branches in the, in the, in the fence.
The second job also was sorting clothing. When after the people went to their death, there were, eh,
eh, mountains of clothings. So I sorted eh pants to pants, jackets to jackets and so on. The last job
was I eh eh, you call me fireman. I did I did, eh, I had a, I had a room like this, bigger, in a big,
had a big oven and I was burning documents. That so was my job. Documents, books, soiled clothing, and
this way there was day after day, was dangerous days eh, as I, eh, always eh fast, schnell and eh there
was a few tragic days. People wonder how could you clean, how could you kill people and impossible to
kill so many people in such a short time. It was pe, it was possible if people didn't know what's
going on. For example a Dutch transport of 3,000 Jews arrived at the train station the, the luggage in
Sobibor, their luggage was taken down, they held, eh, it was a special group of Jews which helped them
to take the baggage down, later they were ordered by Germans to leave the luggage on the platform, it
will be delivered later. And eh, they went further on to a big yard and there They were, eh, oh, they
were eh, they had a sho, eh, the German had a short speech. The German Von Tanik, he's a doctor in
a white uniform, he held a short speech, eh, apologizing for the three day difficult trip, but now they
are here already, take a look, it's beautiful here and eh und eh, because of eh sanitary reasons they
need to have a shower. Please undress yourself, you're going, people undressed and they go to an alley
called Himmelfahrtstrasse, straight to the gas chambers. Before that of course their hair were shorn
and later went down to the gas chambers. Eh, s, eh, went all to the gas chambers and eh, later was a
big scream, slowly, and slowly quiet and they're dead.-
You heard them screaming?
Yeah, and I'm sure eh, screaming , the gas went in that eh last minute, I'm sure the first
minutes, when they, instead of water through the shower head gas did come out I think they were
thinking this was kein, eh, mis eh, mis- malfunction, some, some, to the last minute, I'm sure
they didn't know that it, they, they will to be die, they were there dying actually. And so it
went fast. Three, they killed 3,000 people, take a, three, three hours, four hours.
But the ones who were waiting?
Pardon?
There were people waiting while the others were gassed
When the other were gassed
they couldn't ?
then other people were undressing themselves.
And they could hear the screaming?
Oh yeah! I'm sure. I heard it, in the same place. Decided,
no, what's happened? And they didn't know.
They didn't, they still didn't?
No, no, no way, there was no way to tell them because they wouldn't believe anyway. They just, a few
days ago, they did live in human conditions and are going to the ga, they wouldn't believe it. No
way! As a matter of fact a boy did try to tell and they didn't believe, they went to the German that
the boy is eh telling some absurd. So eh later we just sorted and then finally eh with, with a, with
the Dutch people was like that. Eh before they went to the gas chamber you, eh, we, we cut them the
hair. And the young girls used to say 'oh mister don't, don't, eh, cut too short' and so on
you, Po, was, if it was a Polish transport, the Polish people did know. They didn't play around with
them, we chased them and the Polish eh women, I remember, eh, didn't care how, how you cut their hair,
just they said how could you do it. You'll, you kill too. And things like that. Finally you had arrival
of the Je, eh Russian Jews from the Soviet Union, from Minsk, a lot of former prisoners of war arrived,
Jewish people, recognized as Jews in the POW camp. And eh pretty soon we had military men, because the
Polish Jews we didn't know much about military stuff and now the Russian Jews eh, Frenzel, the German,
took out about seventy people eh from the Strassfolk because he had a lot of work. And he picked out
young people, they were military people, so they had, with them, eh, with the help of them we organized
a revolt, we killed the Nazis, you luring them to different places and there nobody did see and we killed
them, took the pistol, not using
Did you kill yourself? No. Never
Did you help killing?
Yeah, of cou, I did, we lured the Nazis. I went to a, Sessman, I went to him, eh, Oberscharführer,
we fa, we did find a beautiful leather coat in the store room, w, exactly your size. Would you like
to try it on? And they liked stuff like this, he went to this place in the, in the store room and,
while he was trying on, the G, the coat [swallows] putting in the hand, the hand were eh ho, holden
back immediately and he was killed with an axe. And so eh, eh, eh, in, in the, the escape was [swallows]
had two phases. The first phase to kill the, the Nazis. I was going around, another young eh, eh,
eh, another two youngsters were going around looking for the Nazis he, we have seen a one, we start
to lure him. Go there and there, there, there. Practical all, all of them went, were, were asked to
be, I and other people, and the second phase was an open revolt. We had already guns from the kills,
t, SS and if they, in that time was only we yelled hurray, hurray. eh, and we threw ourselves on the
bonfires and the rest of the Germans, and we escaped. According to German report eh 320 escaped. Eh,
but again, you was immediately eh, they chased us, the next day they eh, they did eh grab in the forest
about 100 escapees, only 52 survived. Yeah. That's the whole story. I saw at eh, a Polish farmer
agreed to hide us eh, later he did come with a gun, shot at us, we were three boys and eh, only one
survived for, for, from all of them. Yeah.
When I read your book it's always a hesitation, is this
Pole going to help me or is he going to betray me?
You didn't know what kind door you open. Absolutely, eh, and I suspect most strongly
that Dreszer who went into this house and you were in forest, if you remember,
we were in forest running away from Sobibor an the that he was actual apprehended
in he didn't survive, so he probably was killed by the Poles.
Aha.
Or delivered to the Germans by the Poles. I, I was eh, with
one of the boys, but he was wounded in the finger only.
What was his name?
Schmoel, Schmoel Waiczyn. His brother survived the Soviet Union.
So you were always running for the betrayal of Poles after you came out of the camp?
Yes, but they didn't recognize me. I was a few times apprehended by German, eh in
a Jewish section of the town in Izbica, eh only Jews. Mostly the Jews in Izbica, in
the last months were in the left side of the town. On another side of the road. In the
right side were only Poles in that time. And eh once I was apprehended by German because
I wasn't eh, the star. Are you Jewish? I said no and he went away.
No, but I'm talking about after the war
About what? After the war
Oh, after the war. Yeah. I wouldn't eh risk to go to our village after the war. No, no, n, if
I went, if they would know I'm Jewish, no way. As a matter sometimes, I was forced to go through
our village so I was afraid that somebody will recognize me, more than eh, in the war. Eh.. Can you
..in the war, in the war they told oh the Germans have finished the Jew. And now the German as they
gone, are gonna, still Jews left, so they didn't and a lot, eh I mean, one guy eh could kill
Jews and next it, but was a man which you did want to help and eh this was a crazy world.
Hmhm
But some people risked, my teachers, risked their life actually
to help me. Two of them were Germans. The teachers.
Can you, can you tell the story?
Eh it's nothing to it, I write about this eh when, when, when we were surrounded in before they took
us to Sobibor I have seen many Poles looking from the windows, you know, from the, behind the curtains
eh on the market place, where is an, and I have seen s, some that crossed the market place is smiling
and this teacher, eh, eh, eh, a German, eh Polish ancestry, I mean, German ancestry he went through
the market with his head like that, didn't want to go like that, you could see that he was sorry
for us. It sounded good to smiling, hm, so in, eh besides I went to, when I escaped from Izbica to
Ostica, I was eh, I went to this teacher. Eh Steindl was his name. And he had given me food, he talked
to me another eh teacher too, at night time, because I did go night time, for, eh looking for food,
that helped me, were Poles which helped me, I wouldn't survive otherwise. Some eh, but a lot eh,
when another Jews were hidden I did go free in the villages. Eh once, was because my father was a legionnaire
and his friend, so-called Pilsu, Piłsudski's, that eh, when I told that I'm the, the, the son
of eh Blatt, he did help me. Eh a couple, the Jews were killed in the village, I did run around practical
open. The eh a car eh, eh, eh that eh grabbed me once, they wanted to grab the Polish organization,
but they let me go. Also because my father
Because they were also hostile to Germans?
Eh, but my father eh, you see, it was a order from general Grot, he has a head, he was the head of
the Polish Unterground. It was order, order 116 number that any person eh in the forest or what I,
eh, eh, any person which has a gun illegally, he's not the partisans, eh, should be considered
an enemy and killed. Was mostly directed, by a lot of historians, in my opinion too, it was all,
mostly directed for Jews. Because some Jews had guns. To survive, not to rob, to survive, to defend.
So, because this order a lot of Jews were killed. And eh eh I describe everything exactly in the
ja. So how, how is this eh, you go to an organization to rent a place like this?
Ja.
You have the number, maybe I should do the same thing.
Yes, I'll give it to you. I'll mail you, I'll mail you.
What I will do, I will put also my house, my apartment
in Gdansk to rent. Three years that it is empty.
I want to come back to the interview. Is that okay? I'll,
I'll give you the internet address, I'll give it you.
Ja, ja. Okay. Okay
Don't worry. It's '45 and you, '44, and you are free.
Yeah
What happened?
What happened? [grins ] If you would read this article written in the Polytika, a couple of months ago,
has a interview with me and the title is, he picked it up and I am, in, in exactly the journals picked
up, the title is 'Still running'. You never, still run, till now. I went, went out of Izbica of course,
and this part you know, was in Lublin went to my grandparents' house, stood them on, on the door, seen
a different name on the door, it looked empty ja? Eh, this is also in Lublin, and finally I eh I don't
know, eh, eh, what will it be, eh, which way, give us are able to exist, aha, they'll go to the kitchen
and we went to the social kitchen and did eat, then we go to the Catholic monastery, somebody told me
they give free meals, I went over there and I did eat it by heart and the nurse and the, and a nun comes,
oh, take off your hat. And I was like I've held like a thief that steal, I'm stealing food because
I'm Jewish and here is a monastery, I shouldn't pretend so finally I told the I'm Jewish. And she
allowed me to eat with the hat and I have still have this eh von, before the war, I, I was eh, I hate
to go without a hat. A Jew doesn't go without a hat. So she let me sit with the hat, with the hat she
did give me food over there I did eat and
Where did you sleep?
Pardon?
I slept in a s, in a house in Lublin von der UNNRA. You know UNNRA?
Yes
UNNRA, eh, is eh, was a philantropical organiza, American
organization. Eh, Relief Agency, UN Relief Agency.
Uhuh
Eh, eh, they had eh, a room like that with wooden eh beds, so I was sleeping in
a, always wet bed, that was a shame, but that is as from nerves probably.
I don't understand
I made wet the bed.
Okay
Every night. And it was a shame because here was a, so that, this remember because I was nervous.
You had to go out and see a truck, a militair trucks and that time we hadn't so many cars
like here, we had no cars at all, except military. Mister, could you take me there, I'm going
to Poznań, would you take me to Poznań? Okay. So you could go to Poznań you drove, you made
it in the city, another train, another truck, and you, many times I rode on top of the tru,
on the, on the train, on the roof of the train. Just watching for the tunnels[grins], shouldn't
cut my head. So and eh till now, I like to travel. I just running.
So you, you started a kind of traveling life?
Pardon?
You started traveling?
Yeah. Yeah.
Did you know where you were going to?
No. Only the truck will go to Wrocław I go with it to Wrocław. Eh here the eh and it was liberated,
the Russian tanks comes to the village and eh, a Jewish captain of a tank start to talk to me and
finally the tanks had a order to go move out, after the Germans, and I stood on the tank and then
I didn't want to go down and the captain, you must go down, it's a military vehicle, you, we
can take it, no, I gonna go on with you and he made me to go down. And I was all disappointed that
even the Russians didn't want me. [laughs] So anyway, eh and eh, I was running and, always, and
traveling. I feel the best when I travel. And I have find out how, how did he come up with the title
'Still running'. Did the Poles, I didn't talk about running, nothing.
But I haven't read that, read that article.
Eh, eh
It's in Polish
too bad we didn't go to my place here.
Yeah.
This eh
Yes, but still also the people who look at this video, they
have not read the article. So you should tell me the story
Yeah, I have a lot of eh, the, documentaries which I made
Uhuh
I think they're very good as documentaries, I have it also here.
Too bad we didn't go to me, I would show it to, to you.
Yeah, but if you show a documentary, it's not on the tape
Yeah
I mean, we, we need this okay, so, so you started, let
us start again. You started running, running, running
Yeah
And you ended up in the United States
Yeah.
How
I went from Poland to Israel and from the emp, in Israel I met American tourist, a Jew, and she took
me to America. In America I worked the factory, till I learned the language later opened electronic
store in three cities, Santa Barbara but I had one thing always in my mind, to write my memories, finish,
publish a book, made a film and that actual what I have done. And this is my testament, how would I
say. My will. This are mine, message, my book. What could happened if we are negligent to understand
the political movement, eh, actions you, you fail to understand the signs, the marks for for, of coming
, a coming Holocaust. Israel is scaring me a lot. First of all, right or wrong, but is generating anti-Semitism
in the world, strong anti-Semitism. What do you want? Poland, the biggest anti-Semitism, anti-Semitism
is in eh, in the Catholic countries. What do you expect? Eh, as I said before a kid growing up seeing
on the wall a cross and Jesus nailed down on the cross, daddy what is it? Oh this is a cross. And who
is on the cross? Jesus. And why is this? Because Jews sacrificed him. This is it. This will be a mark
till the end of his, this kid's life is a, the, the, the seeds of anti-Semitism. Either I hate Jews,
they killed Jesus. I will kill the Jews because they killed Jesus. Ready answer. So and eh, the, but
Jesus teach love you, each other, forget this eh guild is on, people don't think about this. But the
Jews killed Jesus he will grow with it.
But you have this message to the world, but you were running,
you never settled down, you never married, family?
Yeah, I'm married, yeah, and I divorced, I divorce. I was with one wife eh twenty years
and another one twenty years. Very honest, twenty years with one girl, oh. [laughs]
Enormous
[laughs] It's okay, ai, twenty years! Long time.
And during that time you were still running?
Pardon?
During that time, you were still running? During the time you were married, you were still running?
The whole time? Yeah, every year, I, I did need to go to Poland.
Oh you want to go to Poland then?
Yeah.
And you immediately started to go back to Sobibor or?
Yeah, in the 1944. The war was still going on. And I
have pictures which are made eh in that time. Yeah.
You went back to Sobibor?
Yeah.
What did you find?
On that time you could find the hair still because they st, just put sand over it and they made it
nice, but later the Poles start to dig and they dig out hair and different stuff. I have my own museum,
a lot of stuff. Which I must send to Yad Vashem as artifacts and melted eh railroad tracks, I was
in Lublin, I went back to the farmer with the Russians, eh, soldiers, a few officers and we took
back, we want to kill the farmer as orders. Either he did hide or his wife said he was in another
town. We didn't find him. But we did find the money. Took back the money. And I did live from this
money for a while. Later I was an eh eh, a, a personal manager in, first I, I was walking in the
Polish security eh looking for Germans for hiding eh SS. In Silesia.
Yeah
And eh later I was studying and later they threw me out from the studies and I was working as a social
director in a resort place and later Gemulka did come to power and he told every Jew could move out if
he want to, to Israel. In 1957 I applied for eh a visa to leave Israel, to live, leave Poland and then
they give me the visa, I went to Israel. In Israel I picked up my manuscript which was send eh with the,
the, di, diplomatical post to eh Israel. There I wasn't able to take it out with the train, when I
left. In eh Israel I met eh, eh, my eh future wife, Dina, American, she and we were together for about
twenty years. Until we divorced. I have a son and my daughter, grandchildren and I have here a daughter
and two grandchildren and two grand grandchildren. [grins] And eh I eh was successful in business. I
did always want to leave something more tangible for the future, because I felt I have something always,
I can't die with this, so wrote the books. I had a film. And actually, that what I had planned is it,
is already done. I have done it. In my small way. If you can't do something the big way, you do the
small way. That's what I've done and eh, eh I hope my, what I leave, historians will use it and they
will see the picture how, what's happened a long time ago. Because the murderers are still alive. The
victims are still alive, you know, they're dying. Eh, that what's happened when the Holocaust happened.
And the worst of it which make me real upset, is in Poland, where things happen, which takes only a few
eh, eh, a few eh, hours travel to Auschwitz, to different places to see what's true. Even here, there
are people denied. Eh professor Wende, that Nazis had swimming pools and so on, and so on, and so on,
that the prisons had regular visits to the swimming pool. This is life, you can do it different way.
De, democracy is sometime, eh, dangerous. It's giving people freedom a freedom also to lie, to hate
eh, t, eh, eh, dictatorship, if you say good dictator, dicta, dictator maybe it's not so bad. So but
eh otherwise eh I'm not afraid of the leftist I'm not afraid of rightist, the most critical part
is the middle that depends on innocent and people will, will go, to the left or to the right. This is
important. Eh in our
But Toivi, you told me that one moment you got very angry with the inscription in Sobibor
Eh, they here were killed eh two hundred
Yeah
the
No, what is the first time you did
In, than , was I, eh, was angry, I was mad, they are lying. It was eh, it was
a, eh time when everything was a lie in eh, in Auschwitz too. They didn't speak
about Jews, they speak of eh Czech, so many Czech did they kill, so many eh Poles
were killed, eh, it was difficult to find a sign Jews. Because
So which period was this? Was it in the sixties?
Pardon?
In which year
In which year? Eh, all the time, until the new solidarity era. So eh so I felt s, the
ambassador of everything, I went to the minister, she had talked to the minister of
culture, minister of religion, oh yes, yes Mr. Blatt eh do hear telephone?
No, I don't
Oh yes, yes, Mr. Blatt, we will eh, eh, do, we look, so final I thought I must do it a different way.
And I went to the kitchen, I went to the local dignitaries from Wlodawa eh? And they did help me.
Tell me?
Yeah, I need to give some nice gifts to them and, and one day I've done it. I don't
want to talk about it much because the people are still alive and I could hurt them,
but b, mention their names, but the day, every day I help, I was able to take down the
sign, the old one, I still have it in Poland hidden, the old sign, that one.
You still have it?
Yeah, that 250, fifty eh Russians were killed. So I have it hidden. And eh
So what does the sign say? 250 Russians were killed here?
Russians, with
and 250
big letters, I have in my, my, you don't have it, it is another book, they let us, and
Poles, Jews, gypsies in small, tiny letters. But fat letters do say 250 Russians.
250,000 or 250
Yes, 250,000
Okay, okay.
Anyway, so I took it down and eh, for a lot of money, because I did need to do it fast or while the,
eh atmosphere is okay, and I spent about 14,000 dollars or 12,000 dollars for signs to make it overnight
practically. In Polish, in eh in eh in German, in French, in Dutch. With the Dutch sign I made a mistake
which are, the ambassador called me later I should correct it. [sighs] Anyway
You made a new sign?
I made these new signs now.
Good
And eh I put it in and it will stay although I finally missed this point probably I, I wouldn't
able to change it, we need to go the commissions and the minister of culture and here and there,
I've done it and it is, it will stay that way, nobody will take it down now.
Hm
The half of people, Germans, were very sympathetic to my
When did this co, idea come into your mind?
When?
Did this idea come to you to do this?
Idea?
Yeah, when, wanneer, kamm es in Ihren Kopf?
Ja, when?
When yes?
When? Now, years ago?
Yes, years ago
When, nothing eh, eh, the war time had to survive.
Yes?
And I put it in my book, the first thing. It's a sort of survival. Was, has nothing to do with
Judaism, has not, I was a Jew but I need to hide, I didn't think, just think how to survive.
Eh no political reasons, no this to survive. Now eh Jewish, no? My mother used to say does it,
is it worth it to give a lie six million, in that time did they not even know six million, to
give a life just to be Jews. Every generation practically did they kill Jews. They ke, they say
that eh how many years ago, I forgot, there were as much Jews as eh British.
Uhuh
But it is eh, now 90 or 70 million and Jews are still fourteen because they fall out, anyway, I thought
that eh religions on eh far away now. I, I don't believe the, I believe that it was written by a
bunch of uneducated people, maybe smart, maybe intelligent, stories about eh, eh frozen eh salt, about
this, that eh, eh, I still believing in this stories, but eh, I am a Jew, a national, I would say
I'm an, a, a nationalistic Jew. I know I am a Jew, the point is this, that the eh, the Bible is
the Jewish history. Can not go away from it. Eh you are in a way religious if you eh believe in the
history of Jewish history and then, I was thinking, eh, I had a Polish eh girlfriend and she want
I should convert. To Christianity which to marry her. Because her mother wouldn't allow it. And
I was surrendered to do it. But later I thought, hell, I'm Jewish, generations, of, generations
survived till now being Jewish, didn't give up and I'm o, the only one left von der family, long
family, eh, if I give up, Hitler has another victim. No. I told them sorry but I'm Jew, I am a Jew
and will stay a Jew. If you don't want to, sorry. So, but I feel eh n, nationalistic, I'm a Jew,
I wouldn't give up eh, eh, eh, eh, feel, many Jews bef, before me suffered and I should be the one
to close the, the, the, the, the saga of the Blatt's? Nein! No. That's all. Eh, analyzing the
past life, I, I'm still in Sobibor. And the dreams. And the dreams I were logical, in the pain,
and become scared and very real. No wonder when I wake up finally eh and I go eat breakfast I want
to go back to bed. Because the dreams, although I sleep good, but they eh finishing me. And when I
get up, eat a little, want to go back to bed.
Really?
Yeah and I could sleep till three o'clock. And later, but after, afternoon late I get, I feel
good, feel strength. Otherwise eh I still now, I'm tired, and the dreams always eh, one thing,
that I had the chance to survive, I had a chance to escape from Sobibor, once the guards they look
some place else and I could run in the forest because I walk in the forest and I don't do it and
later the Germans come to kill me and this is the end and I'm sorry I didn't escape and another
dream is that they forced assessment in Sobibor, Wagner send me out to the city of Lublin to buy
something and I figure out, oh now it's time to escape but he expect me back in an hour, eh, eh,
while the eh, eh, rol-call will take place twelve o'clock. So I figure out now is eleven, till
I go to the train station will take fifteen minutes and I need that train who will, eh leave immediately
and I figure out I will not manage to leave fifty kilometers past eh Lublin because they will notice
in a, in about an hour I'm not there and they will probably notify all the police. Anyway, everything
is logical I think. And I decide to go back to Sobibor. And again they come to kill us all and again
I'm sorry I didn't take the chance. Things like that which is eh maybe he did put it right,
the journalist, eh still escaping.
You spoke once with Frenzel, when did you speak with Frenzel?
In 1963 I think. Or '64 or '66.
What happened?
Pardon?
What happened? What did he say? What did you discuss?
Eh we discussed, we didn't discuss, I wrote in that time one of my books.
Eh, one is my biography eh From the Ashes of Sobibor the other one, the
Sobibor, the Forgotten Revolt, is a sort of the revolt only.
Hmhm
And I did want to know, because I was allowed eh to be in, eh to go to see the Lager 1, Lager 2. I was
not allowed to go l, to Lager 3, nobody at first. Lager 3 was the place where the gas chamber was. Was
closed down with a special fence . In Lager 3 they gassed and they burned the people. Eh so, but I did
want to write my book and t, Frenzel didn't know what's going on. [coughs] Although I, being in Sobibor,
It was always eh, eh, interesting, how would I say, I did want to know what's happened and how this
machine works. In a minute as I took a risk and I did go and check over the here and there, eh so eh
Frenzel was sentenced to life in prison. After sixteen years in jail his lawyer did find some discrepancies
between testimony of two witnesses and on this basis he did, his lawyer did win a retrial. Frenzel's
retrial. But, so Frenzel delivered was in Hannover and he eh when the court session where he was eh,
he did come to Hagen, when the cou, where the court w, eh take place and from Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
he went to the court. In that time they called me as a witness. So I testified against him and so on
and he did live, eh, eh, he had, he lived in a, eh, in a motel eh, the same street I did live in Hagen.
So I wrote down about 17 questions and asked a friend of mine to eh go to Frenzel, he lives here not
far and try to get an answer for the questions for my book. And he left. And a few minutes later I have
a phone call from him, Toivi I want to talk to you. A, at that point I didn't know what to, what to
do because eh going to him I'm making him again a person. If I talk to him he can't be so bad. Eh,
that he picked me up when selected me to work, it's not because I should live, because I should work
over there and the time will come and he could kill me the same way. What I was thinking? With the time
I will be gone, my friends will be gone who could point a finger ha, eh my friends from Sobibor, how
could you do that, eh, Frenzel will be gone but history is history. I go to him and I don't care because
I will do my part for the history. And this is important because never happened till now that a victim
should talk direct with the
Incredible, incredible
so, do you see the picture? And I did go and I remember, eh, I agree we, we talk to him
in the lobby. And I remember opening the door, he was sitting at that table like this,
a bottle of beer, and my German friend Kurtz Bockman was sitting here, I went over and
oh he stood up, he clicked his heels like a officer should do and my, he, I think he did
want to give me, he would shake my hand. And he, and I ask him, Frenzel, you remember
me? He looks and he answered me like that, no, you was just a little boy
[laughs]
No, and I remember, was a little boy. We did talk about four hours.
And what did he tell?
But he said, eh, he said eh, sorry, but I know you can't forgive me eh, and, but I said
I can't one thing understand, understand, reading now about Israel how they fight the
Arabs, how they win, I can't understand why you did make the revolt earlier.
He didn't understand
Yeah. Eh, you, you fight, you were, and it was things like that, we talk and eh, it was all about
What did you answer?
Pardon?
What I did answer?
Yes
Oh, I did answer, it was different times, there were four years eh Just in the dirt, step down, our
spirit was broken eh, that eh they lied and get the, the, the, always said we survive, the hell we
will survive and eh, anyway, I don't remember exactly, I have it written down, but eh, we talked
for a long time. As I ask him if he was sorry and so on, why don't you go, because of a lot of
people say it never happened to him, why don't you go and say I was there, I have done, done it,
I was a part. So he answered me, oh, you know, I can't. you see here, here, here, in the big jobs
there are still Nazis. And If I go and, and talk a, eh, eh, like that, eh, I would, I wouldn't
manage. Something like this, and later [sighs] of course I left and he left
Hm
Yeah
Were you angry?
Pardon?
Were you angry with him, were, did you hate him?
You see, I wasn't angry. I didn't feel anything. Because if I would have some feelings, I wouldn't
be able to talk to him. Some friends of mine said, oh, from Sobibor, I would kill him, I would,
I'm eh, would kill, we could kill him when he was in court, many of who survives was in court
cursing him. It's good if they kill him. If I kill him, let's say, I go to jail. If I got, got,
eh, to jail, who would suffer? My family would suffer, my children would, eh, co, and my children
would consider me me, a murderer, a different times. Besides, killing somebody is nothing. It's
very easy to kill, it's very difficult to live I would say [grins] So eh eh, so I've done the,
but I think still, till now, done the best of it, I did eh eh put my little thing to history eh,
if he, if Frenzel would, giving mostly technical, had a, Gazkammer, eh, gas chamber works , eh,
eh, is only for, for, for his, historians for researchers. Eh I will have time, I will write a little
bit more, because I spent, I met eh this year the brother, one of the murders who we killed, Vallaster,
we killed him in the, when we revolted. But his brother has come to Sobibor and I met him there.
He asked for forgiveness. This year.
Really?
Yeah, this year. So eh and I'm still digging in the papers, but I'm already, I, I want to finish
my third book because I think it's b, it's more interesting in, interesting, it's, is very
interesting because when before all my energy, everything was directed in surviving after the war,
completely different issues that pop out. What shall I do, shall I go studying, I was too impatient,
I was always on the run. Eh it's like I want to free myself from the, from the fences of Sobibor.
Eh, now, political reasons, their party and one way the party is hating Jews and killing Jews. They
killed the leader of the revolt in Lublin after the war. So they
You mean the communists?
No, not the communists. The opposite Nationalists.
Okay, sorry, young Nationalists
Yeah. Eh, and eh so eh you did look for, for a safety place, was a political party PPR which apply,
eh, eh, take in Jews. So I did go there. And eh later I did eh want to take some revenge in, eh,
I walked in the, in our section I think, section four of five, eh looking for the Nazis. And later
I escaped from Poland, come back to Pol, from Ll with the Polish ? come back to Poland and they
say you escaped from Poland. And I, just find my way, my way to, to America.
What do you expect from the Demjanjuk trial?
[sighs] Demjanjuk trial. Demjanjuk got a couple of arguments. One of
the arguments is take a look. They let, there was eh, eh, comma, eh,
eh were c, c, criminal proceedings against the men from Trawniki.
Yeah.
They let free. The commandant of Trawniki.
Yeah
The commandant they let free. I was over there only eh, eh, guard. Why do you suing me? They let free
the commandant. Then other argument would be, now that's in Trawniki, I know in Trawniki they killed
Jews too, but there were no gas chambers. So they sent him to, to eh, Sobibor. Now here everything
takes in different dimension. A guard actually is the lowest rank in the, eh, eh,..
Yeah
..in the army. A guard in concentration camp, in a jail, is standing guard so the prisoner
should not escape. But a guard in Sobibor, a death camp, was a chain in, was a link in
the chain. And they did, he worked, helping to kill the Jews. The seventeen Germans which
were over there in that time, they wouldn't be able to kill 3,000
Exactly
Dutch, but [finger on table] they were the murderers. He is a murderer. That's all. But, but
again, the point is this, that all, why did it n, eh, in, in the Sobibor trial for killing 130,000,
three years, what is this, it's nothing. Eh, but, eh but eh, in that time there were still
the old Nazis, they were still the old Nazis eh in power and there were charges and than . Now
is a different generation. This don't answer why I long time ago where his sentence is very,
very, very, very little though. So now I don't know. I think that eh he will be considered
guilty but because he was already in jail, the eh will let him spend the rest of his years in
home arrest. Could be. Because to America he can't go back. He does have, he has lost his
citizenship so that's all we could do. Why? I guess I remember him?. No. How could I remember,
when I don't I remember the face of my parents?
Now if a thought , if he was in that time when I was in Sobibor, he is a murderer, I have
seen them, I have seen them pushing the people to the gas chambers, not direct, but I went
on to eh, about five meters before the gas chamber was the cutting barracks
Exactly, thanks
Yeah.